---
layout: post
author: martin_hauser
title: "Attempting to identify SSL file formats with Ruby and OpenSSL"
description: "Having any manner of automatic processing of user submitted 
SSL Files (Certificates, Keys, `PKCS#12` Containers) quickly proves a hassle.
Here's an attempt to distinguish these types of files."
category: Ruby
tags: [ruby, openssl]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

## Motivation

Nowadays, every application trying to handle `SSL` Certificates or `RSA` keys
quickly turns into quite a convoluted mess of code and UI, trying to support
the plethora of available file formats out there, without any reliable way to
destinguish them, with the involved files reaching from simple `PEM` and `DER`
formatted keys to complex container structures like `PKCS#12`, code like the
one below is not uncommon, leaving the product with unhandy, complex, slow and
often counterintuitive code.

        require 'openssl'

        def is_pem?(blob)
          OpenSSL::PKey::RSA.new(blob)  # throws error if unparsable
          return blob[0..9] == "-----BEGIN"
        rescue OpenSSL::PKey::RSAError
          return false
        end

        def is_der?(blob)
          OpenSSL::PKey::RSA.new(blob) # throws error if unparsable
          return true
        rescue OpenSSL::PKey::RSAError
          return false
        end

        def is_pkcs12?(blob, pin)
          OpenSSL::PKCS#12.new(blob, pin)
          return true
        rescue OpenSSL::PKCS#12::PKCS#12Error
          return false
        end

        def identify_openssl_type(blob, pin)
          if pin && is_pkcs12?(blob, pin)
            return :pkcs12
          elsif is_pem?(blob)
            return :pem
          elsif is_der?(blob)
            return :der
          else
            return :unknown
          end
        end

Not only is this example very difficult to handle, it also relies on a lot
of assumptions that can get in your way. For example, it assumes that the
contents of the `DER` formated file is a `RSA` key, yet not a `PEM` formated
file.

Furthermore, a `PKCS#12` container can not be successfully identified using this
method unless the user provides the correct `PIN`, which might not even be
available at this point in the code flow, yielding an
*"OpenSSL::PKCS#12::PKCS#12Error: PKCS#12_parse: mac verify failure"* which is not
something a user will typically understand. `PEM` files are easy to detect due
to their ASCII compatible encoding and the typical **-----BEGIN** header.

However, Ruby's OpenSSL library does provide us with a some helpful functions
that allow for easier identification of these file formats.


## Attempt on finding a solution

The key to finding a better, useful solution is understanding the basic
structure of these SSL formats to detect certain patterns that work
reliable enough, depending on what you wish to accomplish. While this approach
will not lead to a solution that will cover every obscure SSL file that one
devious mind can devise, it will work reliably to handle every day SSL file
detection and aid in simplifing your code flow.

I recommend reading a bit upon the subject on ASN.1 Data types used by OpenSSL,
specifically what Tags are and how they are used, for example in
[here](http://luca.ntop.org/Teaching/Appunti/asn1.html).

A number of tag numbers in the **UNIVERSAL** tag class can for example be read
upon in the [OpenSSL Ruby bindings RDoc](http://docs.ruby-lang.org/en/2.0.0/OpenSSL/ASN1.html).

To explore the general structure of a standard SSL file, Ruby offers a very
nifty way via its OpenSSL library:

         require 'openssl'

         def decode_asn1(blob)
           OpenSSL::ASN1.decode(blob)
         end

        irb(main):012:0> asn = decode_asn1(File.read("test_key.der"))
        => #<OpenSSL::ASN1::Sequence ...>

Further inspecting yields that this is a 'Sequence', meaning ASN1s way
of representing Array-like structures. Using standard **#to_a** will turn
it into a more managable format.

`DER` keys are composed of integers, as they are a raw representation
of the data making up (in this case) an RSA key, which in turn just is a very
long integer value (bigint). Note that **OpenSSL::BN** just represents
potentially large numbers which in turn can just be converted into Ruby's
fixnum and bignum datatypes.


        irb(main):072:0> k=OpenSSL::PKey::RSA.new(256)
        => #<OpenSSL::PKey::RSA:0x0000ff9ddfd228>
        irb(main):073:0> OpenSSL::ASN1::decode(k.to_der).to_a[0]
        => #<OpenSSL::ASN1::Integer:0x0000ff95e441a8 @tag=2, ...>
        irb(main):074:0> OpenSSL::ASN1::decode(k.to_der).to_a[0].value
        => #<OpenSSL::BN:0x0000ff9644e440>
        irb(main):075:0> OpenSSL::ASN1::decode(k.to_der).to_a[0].value.to_i
        => 0

This zero is always decoded from all RSA and DSA keys and the 2 in the tagging
does denote an integer, according to specifications.

Analysing `DER` encoded `X509` certificates is sadly even less insightful due to
the structure involved, containing a lot of information that do not compute
to meaningful patterns due to the complicated structure of `X509`.

A way to have a better look at this, is to automatically unwrap all Sequence
data types. To understand the example code below, one should be aware that
on parsing, ruby parses most tagged values into ASN1Data values (see
[the OpenSSL Ruby RDoc](http://docs.ruby-lang.org/en/2.0.0/OpenSSL/ASN1/ASN1Data.html) for more
information on this).

        def to_tag_name(obj)
          return "-" unless obj.respond_to?(:tag)
          return "?" unless obj.tag_class.to_s == "UNIVERSAL"
          return OpenSSL::ASN1::UNIVERSAL_TAG_NAME[obj.tag]
        end

        def to_simple_asn1(obj)
          case obj
          when OpenSSL::ASN1::Sequence
            return :sequence => obj.to_a.map {|o| to_simple_asn1(o)}
          when OpenSSL::ASN1::ASN1Data
            return :data => to_simple_asn1(obj.value), :tag => to_tag_name(obj)
          when OpenSSL::BN
            return :bn => obj.to_i
          when Hash
            return obj.reduce({}) {|acc,(k,v)| acc[k] = to_simple_asn1(v);acc }
          when Array
            return obj.map {|kv| to_simple_asn1(kv)}
          else
            if obj.respond_to?(:tag)
              return :data => obj, :tag => to_tag_name(obj)
            else
              return :data => obj
            end
          end
        end

Call this by passing it an ASN.1 tree created by **OpenSSL::ASN1.decode**.

This given code snippet allows you get a rough impression of how the internal
code structure does look like and which bits can be used to identify the
file-format you are trying to detect. For example, with this method you can
discover a reliable string 'pkcs7-data' for `PKCS#12` files that is always
present within the header of such files and is tagged in a specific manner.
Please note that the 'pkcs7-data' merely marks  signed/encrypted data according
to the `PKCS#7` standard, but it can serve as identifying mark for the
`PKCS#12` file here. Basically interpret this Ruby code snippet as the poor
man's `SSL` file deconstructor. Below you'll find an real life example for
applying this.

## One possible Solution

This is a variation of how the code could look like to tell different OpenSSL
formats apart:

        module OSSLSupport

          TAG_INT = 2
          TAG_ID = 6

          def self.is_pkcs12?(data)
            return false unless data.is_a?(OpenSSL::ASN1::Sequence)

            tag, container, _ = data.value
            if tag.tag == TAG_INT && tag.value.to_i == 3 && tag.tag_class == :UNIVERSAL
              identifier, _ = container.value
              if identifier.tag == TAG_ID && identifier.value == "pkcs7-data"
                return true
              end
            end

            return false
          end

          def self.identify(data)
            return unless data.present?
            data.chomp! if data[-1] == "\n"
            return :pem if data.is_a?(String) && data[0..9] == "-----BEGIN"

            data = OpenSSL::ASN1.decode(data)

            if is_pkcs12?(data)
              return :pkcs12
            end

            # if pkcs12 is not detected, assume :der
            return :der
          end
        end

This code uses a mixture of the ideas explained above. It will first get all
`PEM` formats out of the way, as those are easy destinguishable and knowing it's
a `PEM` file usually is enough to instantiate the right classes. If it's not a
`PEM` file, the code aims to determine whether it's a pkcs12 encoded file by
looking for an ID tag that is pkcs7-data, in which case it is clear that
it's a pkcs12 encoded file. Otherwise, it is assumed to be simple der encoded
certificate or key.

Similar to the code snippet above, detection of other formats can be performed
in a similar manner.
